Israel is preparing for a possible
ground assault against Hamas in the Gaza
Strip at the same time US Secretary of
State Anthony blinkin is in Israel to
show solidarity with an anguishing ally
but also to sound out diplomatic
possibilities listening whether or not
Israel in the Middle East still have an
ear for
peace from here I'll go on to Jordan
where I'll meet with his majesty King
Abdullah and with Palestinian Authority
president Abbas and then over the coming
days we'll visit with leaders in Saudi
Arabia the United Arab Emirates Egypt
and
qter across each of these engagements
we'll continue pressing countries to
help prevent the conflict from spreading
and to use their leverage with Hamas to
immediately and unconditionally release
the
hostages we'll also discuss how we can
continue to make real our affirmative
vision for a region that's more peaceful
more prosperous more secure more
integrated
and in fact that is the choice and the
choice in some ways has been made even
more
Stark by the actions of Hamas on
Saturday One path forward is a region
that comes together
integrated normalized relations among
its countries people working in common
purpose to Common
benefit more peaceful more
stable then there's the path that Hamas
has
shown in Stark clear light Terror
destruction
nihilism the choice could not be more
clear we know the choice that we're
making our partners are
making we have work to do to carry it
through all right I want to bring in
Laura Blumenfeld now she spent two
decades as a reporter covering the
Middle East for the Washington Post she
also served at the US state department
as a policy adviser for the Middle East
peace process and she is the author of
Revenge a story of Hope which she wrote
after searching for a Palestinian gunman
who shot and wounded her father in
Jerusalem a woman well qualified to talk
about what we're talking about tonight
miss blefeld it's good to have you with
us you spent 20 years as a reporter in
the Middle East where do the events of
the past five days rank in your
experience well in the words of the
Secretary of State who you were just
featuring it defies
comprehension um we thought we'd seen it
all and the two words that keep coming
back again and again in these broadcasts
is unprecedented and
barbarism if you look at the scale of
the Israeli response so far how do you
think the Israeli strategy will
evolve
well they've got to present this as a
war of necessity the the the endgame is
to erase Hamas but you know how do you
go about it it has to be uh not one of
blood lust but of basic survival I think
what was so traumatizing for Israelis is
that the attack on Saturday Not only was
attack on borders but it was on the
imagination it went to the very heart of
what Israel was supposed to be it went
from Safe Haven to slaughterhouse and so
they need to show strength because this
is all about in a word deterrence but it
can't be brute strength it has to
demonstrate sophistication and strategic
um forethought I remember speaking two
years ago the head of the mosad and I
asked him about retaliation when I was
reporting my book revenge and he said to
me we retaliate you choose the strategy
you choose the battlefield and you
choose the timing now what's so
complicated now is Israel has no choice
it's it's upon them they're they're the
masters of the preemptive strike and
they're paying catchup
and the Palestinians involved here I
mean we've heard warnings of collective
punishment for the Palestinians um in
the Gaza Strip we've noticed also this
week that when um Palestinians have been
interviewed it has been difficult even
um for moderate Palestinians or their
leaders to condemn the atrocities
carried out by Hamas why do you think
that
is you know when I was negotiating as a
state department senior advisor on
secretary Ker's uh Israeli Palestinian
team we were dealing with concrete
issues tangibles like borders security
Refugee Jerusalem but the intangibles
were just as challenging if not more and
what I mean by that is narrative there's
context and history to this conflict it
goes back a hundred years or thousands
depending on where you'd like to begin
you could take it all the way back to
Genesis if you'd like um and sometimes
the the sides get trapped inside their
own narratives and it it it it uh
eliminates the possibility for empathy
and empathy really is the way
forward we we heard a very nuanced
message from Anthony blinkin uh today
that support for Israel at the same time
we recognize that Palestinians have
legitimate aspirations not to be ruled
by Hamas and the US will work with those
in the region committed to that and to
peace is that the message that Benjamin
Netanyahu wanted to
hear well this was this was secretary
blinkin ber ler and I apologize for my
pronunciation moment he landed in Israel
and he said I am here as Secretary of
State I'm also here as a Jew my
stepfather was a survivor of aitz so I
think he established his credentials
what he was saying to the prime minister
is I am I am one of I am I am you you
are me we are we stand together and
after that he said you know he talked
about the atrocities he talked about
Israel's right to defend itself but he
also said how Israel does this matters
we are the same morally and we expect
that of our brother in arms and so I
think that he I think that he sort of
established the right to demand humanity
and also yes sewing the seeds of Peace
look where the Secretary of State's uh
look at his travel itinerary it's Egypt
Jordan UAE cutter Saudi Arabia and
Beyond these are the seeds of Peace
because in in in the crazy upside down
world of the Middle East War often does
lead to a greater peace yeah and and
perhaps perhaps Anthony B is the the
right man at the right time I mean the
United States as you know has been
largely absent as a mediator in the
Israeli Palestinian Conflict for the
past what decade and a half um what
chance does the Biden Administration
have to restart those
talks well I think there's great
opportunity and there's also a narrow
window because there are the realities
of domestic politics we're walking into
you know we're we're we're approaching
an election season national elections
presidential race and nobody wants to
run for president with two Wars right
you've got Ukraine and then there's also
the Middle East uh hostages just bring
back you know the nightmare of Jimmy
Carter and an oil crisis back in the 70s
failed presidential candidates don't
don't uh you know you're not looking for
a war or for an oil crisis all of this
uh threatens that unless there can be a
quick resolution this week we've heard
numerous times um that the path to peace
and a two-state solution will be
rediscovered in a future fure minus
Hamas and a future minus Netanyahu do
you
agree well I mean I think that there
will be many uh resignations and
political upheaval netanyahu's political
career started if you recall back in the
70s with a hostage crisis right there
was the hijacking of the plane to anbi
and his brother was a military hero was
part of that rescue he died and
netanyahu's star rose unfortunately I I
I think it would wouldn't be you know
going out on a limb to say that this is
the end of his career ending also with a
hostage crisis they're they're neat and
tragic book
ends um what about the Palestinians I
mean who who is Netanyahu going to call
that if he wants to talk with them I
mean where are the Palestinians who can
talk to Israel and have legitimacy among
their own
people well the Palestinian Authority
you know they were the ones that who
negotiated uh the Oslo Accords the first
time I was sent to Gaza for the
Washington Post was in 1993 where I I
interviewed Hamas leaders they were
literally sitting in the streets in the
dirt bemoaning the end of their movement
this was 30 years ago um so I think that
because they felt like the Palestinian
Authority had seized the imagination of
of the Palestinian people and
represented them so when there is
opportunity when there is hope I think
that there are um you know there are
plenty of leaders among the Palestinian
people who truly represent the desire to
live as two people side by side that was
never the case case with Hamas again
going back all the years that I've been
meeting with them with their leaders it
was always maximalist it was it was a
religious War to to occupy the entire um
all of Palestine I got I've got um about
20 seconds left quickly let me just ask
you um talks between Netanyahu and mmud
abas um and bringing peace is is that
possible at
all well I think right now nobody's
talking right there's there's going to
be fighting and then the dust settles
and then you figure out where you stand
for the Israelis they need to really
show a show of strength and if they
emerge from this um able to sort of
reestablish their Sheen of deterrence
their Swagger I think they might be
willing to take chances for peace but
right now the Israelis I mean they're
reeling they're on the ropes we've seen
it before they're on the ropes just
punching but right now it's it's gloves
off La bloing Feld joining us tonight
from New York City Mr blel we appreciate
you taking the time and we appreciate
you making this talk happen I know you
um it's been a busy day for you thank
you glad to be here thank
you Daniel kurtzer was Ambassador to
Egypt under President Bill Clinton he
was US ambassador to Israel from 2001 to
2005 Ambassador it's good to have you
with us this evening the Biden
Administration as you well know has been
critical of the Netanyahu government in
the past the the scale of the Hamas
atrocities plus the establishment of
this emergency government do you think
all of this will prompt Washington or is
prompting Washington to give Netanyahu
cart blanch to respond to
Hamas well Secretary of State uh Tony
blinkin is landing in Israel probably
right about now and I'm pretty confident
that he's carrying two messages number
one is please reread what president uh
uh Biden said and that the United States
stands uh supporting Israel we have
their back but I think the private
message is um you need to moderate uh
the response in a manner that doesn't
create its own humanitarian distress and
problem Gaza has been a problem for
quite some time the people are being
held hostage by Hamas now they have
Israeli hostages as well um so Israel
will need to take this into account as
it searches out the Hamas leadership and
tries to decapitate it what do you think
the role of the United States should be
um at this critical time should it be to
offer unconditional support to Israel or
should it be an agent to help break the
cycle of violence I mean if the United
States doesn't do it then what power
will well I don't like the word cycle of
violence uh hamas's actions over the
weekend are beyond the pale and uh
represent a horrific uh escalation of
its own I think the United States as
Israel's closest Ally can provide the
kind of sobering advice that uh I hope
secretary blinkin is bringing but as you
saw we're also uh sending two aircraft
carrier battle groups to the
Mediterranean to send a very important
message uh to other players such as his
Bala in Lebanon and Iran not to escalate
this crisis
so I think we we play those two
different roles um we will work with
countries like Egypt and cutter to see
if we can't get some dialogue started to
uh address the issue of the hostages uh
and see how this goes forward uh but uh
Israel is intent upon uh trying to uh uh
not only diminish but to uh destroy
hamas's capabilities of ever doing again
uh the horror of what they committed
this
weekend prime minister n Yahoo he talks
about now of reshaping the Middle East
um what is what's your take on on that
rhetoric um what do you think he
means well frankly I don't know um I
think before hamas's attack there was a
sense that a Saudi
Israel understanding or normalization
agreement would be
transformative uh and I think that's
what the Biden Administration was
pursuing in the aftermath of what Hamas
has done however uh I think it's going
to need we're going to need a lot of
time for things to sort out and I'm not
sure that there's a new Middle East a
comfortable Middle East that's going to
emerge very easily um Israel will be on
edge uh hisb represents a significant
threat both in the context of what's
happening now but also in the future
Iran's nuclear pretentions represent a
significant threat and so uh the
analysts and policy makers ERS are going
to be working overtime to try to figure
this out I think it's premature to make
big declarations about what the Middle
East will be and and I'm wondering what
this is going to do to the the thrust of
US foreign policy the United States has
been trying to to shift its focus from
the Middle East um more towards a new
security Focus being on Asia of course
arising China does this conflict does it
mean that that shifting policy is that
over or is it going to be
suspended well I think the us as well as
others will have to reassess the bases
of its uh policies and approach in this
region um we certainly are not going to
change with respect to our support for
Israel and its security we're not going
to change with respect to our support
for other allies Egypt Jordan Saudi
Arabia uh we're not going to change with
respect to the importance of uh the
security of oil and gas exports but uh
how things shape out with respect to
non-state actors I mean this has been a
problem that all of us have been
grappling with for a long time and no
one really has a handle on it with
States you can expect some kind of
normal uh Behavior sometimes they go to
war sometimes they don't non-state
actors are not governed by any of these
rules and as we saw this weekend not
only has Hamas broken the the rules of
international Behavior but has really
declined into a a
bloodthirsty uh horrible uh killing
machine which uh is hard to grasp the
level of um disinformation on social
media um when it pertains to this
conflict I mean it has reached
unprecedented levels and a common theme
that we're seeing is is an attempt to
create a moral equivalence between
Israeli actions and the atrocities
committed by
Hamas how do you see
this look it's a particular problem
worldwide I see it on the college campus
I teach at Princeton University and uh
we want to be sensitive to the feelings
of uh American Jews and Israelis on
campus who have been affected
emotionally by what happened but we also
need to be sensitive to the fact that we
have Palestinian and Arab students who
are now watching uh destruction of homes
and and the killing of people in Gaza U
and social media uh only exacerbates the
problem uh you know I think you heard
that um Israelis have advised parents to
keep their children off of social media
they don't want them to see some of the
most horrific images that are out there
but uh you're not going to get a lot of
people off of social media and that
means that the chance of disinformation
uh uh really becomes much greater and
only adds to the burden of trying to
calm the situation
down Ambassador cter we appreciate you
taking the time to talk with us we
appreciate your valuable insights
tonight thank
you my pleasure
thanks I just spoke with Shalom lipner
he is a fellow at the Atlantic Council
he specializes in US Israeli relations I
asked him how important Anthony blink's
show of support for Israel
is right now yeah it's hugely
significant for Israel I mean you know
is they're on the verge of a larger what
appears to be a larger ground operation
you know figuring out what the next
steps look like large piece of that will
be sort of the international legitimacy
behind that that will be the wind in
Israel sales as it you know gets that
job done unprecedented statements of
support coming from secretary blinkin
from President Biden secretary defense
Austin is on as we as Israel as well we
know about the carrier group uh the Ford
group you know the USG Ford gon Howard
was on the way to the region as well I
mean strong s you know show support from
the United States um hugely important
for Israel and for the region blinkin
also today warned any enemies of Israel
not to try and take advantage of this
crisis why do you think he felt that he
needed to issue that warning
now that's right again I mean you know
he's echoing sentiments we heard from
President Biden as well and the
president talked about the possibility
of other other people getting into this
fry and he you know he said emphatically
don't um you know there there are real
fears that this could expand to other to
other uh theaters most particularly the
Lebanese border opposite hisbah as we're
looking forward to see if this you know
becomes a wider regional conflict or
it's something that stays sort of
contained geographically to the Gaza
area um you know the presence the
statements from coming from
Administration officials the presence of
uh you know raw American fire power in
the in the Mediterranean and other parts
of the region sending that message to
other people you know Israel is going to
deal with Hamas situation is untenable
the way that it is let's not make this a
larger fight not good for anybody here
America's you know willing to put fire
power on the table to make sure that
doesn't happen Mr Lim you have worked
for seven Israeli Prime Ministers you
know take taking your experience here
what influence does the US have on
Israel in conflicts such as the one that
we're looking at right
now well America's always been you know
the sort of America's uh I'm sorry
America's always been Israel's back stop
in that respect you know it's always
there it's been uh a real uh force of
diplomatic support economic support
Military Support um even moving forward
you know when uh now we're seeing other
other countries getting involved as well
but when all of a sudden Israel needed
reinforcements now the first country to
step up after you know being asked was
the United States sending in you know
reinforcements shipments arriving um and
you know and the fact that the United
States will sort of stand guard on the
security Council and other places to say
that Israel's performing this task it
has to because the current situation is
untenable that will allow Israel space
to continue that you know conceivably as
long as that exists to be able to get
that job done if that were to dry up it
would you know conceivably bring other
countries in to start to say you know
maybe it's time to stop but as long as
America standing at Israel side on this
that we'll have an incredible you know
the incredible force of keeping Israel
Moving you know towards its Target
Anthony blinkin plans to visit um Jordan
tomorrow he plans to um talk with with
other key figures in the Middle East I'm
wondering how much influence can the
United States have right now in the
Middle East considering that basically
for the past 10 years it's shifted its
focus away from that region I mean it's
been dealing with the rising China in
the last year and a half it's been
dealing with Ukraine and Russia I mean
it's basically been a no-show for a lot
of things um how much Authority does it
have
left well I think this moment you know
sort of emphasizes the
interconnectedness between all these
theaters now I mean you're right you
know certainly within the region you
talk to people in the region and you
hear repeatedly you know concerns that
America sort of picked up and gone
elsewhere um you know but we're seeing
new levels of of American engagement in
the region now as a result of this
there's a lot of writing on the outcome
of how this conflict comes out um you
know there indicated there were
disappointment in the gulf and other
places too when when us allies found
themselves under attack and sort of were
wondering why the United States wasn't
stepping up right now you know the White
House and and other agencies are making
it clear that they are here and that
they mean business um that will be the
message they they you know distribute in
other capitals as well um and hoping you
know to be able to to sort of
reinvigorate that uh that pack between
the US has had with with its long-term
allies in the
middle Shalom lipner senior fellow at
the Atlantic Council Mr lner we
appreciate your time and your analysis
tonight thank
you